.\" Man page for redactor
.\" The version and date in .TH are rewritten by scripts/release.sh -- if you
.\" change that line's shape, update the sed there too.
.TH REDACTOR 1 "2026-07-16" "redactor 1.3.0" "User Commands"
.
.SH NAME
redactor \- anonymize texts, logs, READMEs and code
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B redactor
[\fIOPTION\fR]... [\fIFILE\fR]...
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B redactor
is
.BR sed (1)
with a predefined rule list. It reads text from standard input, or from the
given \fIFILE\fRs, applies every rule from its config files, and writes the
result to standard output.
.PP
Its distinguishing feature is
.B stable pseudonymization:
the same value always becomes the same placeholder, so a redacted log still
shows that two lines concern the same client without revealing which one. With
.B \-\-map
that mapping survives across runs and files, which is what keeps a redacted
README consistent with the code next to it.
.PP
.B redactor
imports nothing outside the Python standard library.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Rules
.TP
.BR \-e ", " \-\-expr " \fIRULE\fR"
Add a rule. Same syntax as a config line, so
.B \-e 'robert user1'
is identical to the config line \fBrobert user1\fR. Repeatable.
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-file " \fIPATH\fR"
Load an additional rule file. Repeatable.
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-profile " \fINAME\fR"
Load a ready-made rule set: \fBwebserver\fR, \fBsshd\fR, \fBdhcpd\fR,
\fBftp\fR, \fBmail\fR, \fBconfigfiles\fR. Repeatable. Loaded before
.BR \-f ,
so your own rule files can extend a profile.
.TP
.B \-\-list\-profiles
Print the available profiles and where they came from, then exit.
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-no\-config
Ignore \fI/etc/redactor.conf\fR, \fI~/.config/redactor.conf\fR and
\fI.redactor\fR, and do not auto-discover a \fI.redactor.map\fR. Use only what
was passed on the command line.
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-list\-rules
Print the loaded rules with their source, then exit. The fastest way to answer
"why is my rule not matching?".
.
.SS How to replace
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-ask
Confirm every replacement: \fBy\fR (or Enter) yes, \fBn\fR no, \fBa\fR yes to
all remaining. The dialog is read from \fI/dev/tty\fR, not standard input, so
it works in the middle of a pipe. Without a terminal this is an error rather
than a silent full redaction.
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\-blank
Ignore the configured replacements and emit as many spaces as the match was
long. Same length, not empty, so columns in logs and indentation in code
survive.
.TP
.BR \-k ", " \-\-keep\-length
Keep the pseudonym but pad it with spaces to the length of the original.
.
.SS What to do with the result
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-in\-place
Rewrite the given files instead of writing to standard output. Requires file
arguments. Written via a temporary file and
.BR rename (2),
so a crash never leaves a half-redacted file; file modes are preserved and
files with no matches are not touched at all.
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-diff
Show a unified diff of what would change. Writes no redacted output. See
.B \-\-color
for how the changed part of a line is marked.
.TP
.BR \-\-color ", " \-\-colour " \fIWHEN\fR"
\fBauto\fR (default), \fBalways\fR or \fBnever\fR. Colors the
.B \-\-diff
output and, more usefully, inverts the characters that actually differ within a
line: whole-line red and green says something changed in a 200-character log
line, not what. \fBauto\fR means only when standard output is a terminal, so a
redirect or a pipe stays clean. \fB$NO_COLOR\fR (when set and non-empty) and
\fBTERM=dumb\fR switch \fBauto\fR off; an explicit \fBalways\fR overrides them.
.IP
\fB\-\-colour\fR is accepted as an alias. It is the only place the British
spelling appears; everything else, including \fB$NO_COLOR\fR, uses \fBcolor\fR.
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-check
Report what would be replaced and exit 1 on any match. Writes no output.
Intended for pre-commit hooks and CI.
.TP
.BR \-A ", " \-\-audit
Report values that look sensitive but no rule touched. Redacts nothing, writes
no output, always exits 0. Heuristic and deliberately chatty: it asks whether
you meant to keep something, it does not decide. It inspects the \fIoutput\fR,
and ignores both redactor's own placeholders and everything \fB@keep\fR spared.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-stats
After processing, print the match count per rule to standard error.
.PP
.BR \-i ", " \-d ", " \-c " and " \-A
are mutually exclusive.
.
.SS Mapping
.TP
.BR \-m ", " \-\-map " \fIPATH\fR"
Keep the value-to-placeholder mapping in \fIPATH\fR (JSON), so the same host,
IP or user gets the same placeholder across runs and files. Created if missing.
An existing \fI.redactor.map\fR is picked up automatically, searched upwards
from the current directory; creating one always requires an explicit
.BR \-\-map .
.IP
The map is the key to reversing the redaction. Do not commit it.
.TP
.BR \-u ", " \-\-unredact
Apply the mapping backwards, turning placeholders back into the original
values. Requires a map.
.B @secret
is excluded by design: it writes a fixed marker rather than a pseudonym, so it
is one-way.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print version, author and project URL.
.
.SH RULE SYNTAX
One rule per line; \fB#\fR at the start of a line is a comment. Values
containing spaces go in quotes. The same syntax is used for
.BR \-e .
.
.SS Literal (the default)
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
company.com             example.com
foo@email.com           redacted@example.com
"Robert Mueller"        "Max Mustermann"
hunter2                                       # no replacement \-> [REDACTED]
.EE
.RE
.PP
The search text is taken literally \(em it is not a regex, so \fB.\fR, \fB@\fR
and \fB+\fR need no escaping. A literal matches inside words too: \fBrobert\fR
also hits \fBroberta\fR. That is the safe direction; see
.B @word
below.
.
.SS @word \(em whole words only
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
@word robert            user1
.EE
.RE
.PP
Matches \fBrobert\fR, \fBrobert,\fR and \fBrobert@x.ch\fR, but not
\fBroberta\fR, \fBrobert123\fR or \fBxrobert\fR. "Word" means no letter, digit
or underscore directly adjacent.
.PP
Literal is the default because the two failure directions are not equal: a
literal that is too broad over-redacts, which is cosmetic; a
.B @word
that is too narrow under-redacts, which is a leak.
.
.SS Classes
.TP
.B @ip ", " @ipv6
Every address \(-> \fB10.0.0.1\fR, \fBfd00::1\fR
.TP
.B @email
Every address \(-> \fBredacted1@example.com\fR
.TP
.B @mac
Every MAC \(-> \fB02:00:00:00:00:01\fR (a locally administered range, so the
pseudonym's OUI means nothing)
.TP
.BR @hostname " [\fINAME\fR|\fI/REGEX/\fR...]"
Without arguments, this host's own names \(-> \fBhost1\fR. Arguments may be
plain names, \fI/regex/\fR patterns, or both:
\fB@hostname web01 /ge[0-9]{3}/\fR. A pattern is for a fleet with a naming
scheme, where listing every machine means the next one leaks. Unlike a plain
regex rule, matches still go through the mapping, so \fBhost1\fR and
\fBhost2\fR stay stable and distinct.
.TP
.BR @user " [\fINAME\fR|\fI/REGEX/\fR...]"
Without arguments, the current user \(-> \fBuser1\fR. Takes patterns the same
way: \fB@user /svc-.*/\fR
.TP
.B @uri
\fBhttps://git.corp/x?token=a\fR \(-> \fBhttps://host1/x\fR. Scheme, port and
path are kept; the host is pseudonymized through the same table as
.BR @hostname ;
userinfo, query and fragment are dropped, because that is where credentials
live. Needs \fB://\fR \(em an access-log request line has no scheme, and its
query string is caught by
.B @secret
instead.
.TP
.BR @path " [\fIPREFIX\fR [\fIREPLACEMENT\fR]]"
Without arguments, home directories: \fI/home/alice/x\fR \(->
\fI/home/user1/x\fR, mapped through the same table as
.BR @user .
With arguments, a literal prefix replacement. This is the only way to write it:
a bare rule \fB/home/alice/myproject/ X\fR would be parsed as a regex, because
it starts and ends with a slash.
.TP
.B @sshkey
\fBSHA256:\fR fingerprints and \fBssh-rsa AAAA...\fR keys \(-> \fBsshkey1\fR.
A fingerprint is not a secret but it is a stable identifier: two logs sharing
one prove the same person touched both.
.TP
.BR @phone " [\fICOUNTRY\fR...]"
International formats only by default (\fB+41...\fR, \fB0041...\fR) \(->
\fBphone1\fR, validated against E.164's 8-15 digit range, and mapped on the
normalized number so two spellings share one pseudonym. National formats are
opt-in per country (\fBch\fR, \fBde\fR, \fBat\fR, \fBus\fR) because a bare
\fB079 123 45 67\fR looks like any other number in a log.
.TP
.B @secret
Vendor tokens, JWTs, query parameters, Bearer/Basic headers, cookies, password
hashes, \fBpassword=\fR assignments, SNMP community strings and whole private
key blocks \(-> \fB[SECRET]\fR. Not pseudonymized and not reversible: a token
should be gone, not correlated. Deliberately trigger-happy \(em in code it also
hits \fBtoken = get_token()\fR.
.TP
.BR @keep " \fIVALUE\fR..."
The opposite: never replace these. Without it,
.B @ip
pseudonymizes \fB127.0.0.1\fR and
.B @uri
turns every \fBhttps://github.com/...\fR link in a README into
\fBhttps://host1/...\fR. A kept URI host leaves the whole URL alone, query
included. Applies globally regardless of line order, and appears in
.BR \-\-list\-rules .
.
.SS Regex and blocks
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
/sess_[0-9a-f]{32}/     SESSION_REDACTED
/(password=)\eS+/        "\e1REDACTED"
/(?i)secret/            X
@block /\-\-\-\-\-BEGIN CERTIFICATE\-\-\-\-\-/ /\-\-\-\-\-END CERTIFICATE\-\-\-\-\-/ "[CERT]"
.EE
.RE
.PP
A pattern wrapped in slashes is a regex; \fB\e1\fR backreferences work in the
replacement.
.B @block
replaces everything between two markers with a single text, and is line-based
so streaming still works on large logs. If input ends inside a block, the
remainder stays redacted.
.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/redactor.conf
System-wide rules.
.TP
.I ~/.config/redactor.conf
Per-user rules. Honours \fB$XDG_CONFIG_HOME\fR.
.TP
.I .redactor
Per-project rules, searched upwards from the current directory like
\fI.gitignore\fR.
.TP
.I .redactor.map
Value-to-placeholder mapping, searched upwards. Never committed.
.TP
.I /usr/share/redactor/profiles/
Ready-made rule sets. Also searched in
\fI~/.config/redactor/profiles/\fR and next to the script.
.PP
Config files accumulate in the order listed above, then
.BR \-p ,
then
.BR \-f ,
then
.BR \-e .
Rules are applied in that same order, and each rule operates on the output of
the previous one \(em so \fBfoo bar\fR followed by \fBbar baz\fR turns \fBfoo\fR
into \fBbaz\fR.
.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success. Also the normal result of
.B \-\-audit
and of
.B \-\-check
when nothing matched.
.TP
.B 1
.B \-\-check
found at least one match.
.TP
.B 2
Usage error, or a file could not be read or written.
.TP
.B 130
Interrupted.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Filter a log:
.RS 4
.EX
cat /var/log/messages | redactor
.EE
.RE
.PP
Use a ready-made rule set:
.RS 4
.EX
redactor \-p webserver /var/log/apache2/access.log
.EE
.RE
.PP
Anonymize files that belong together, keeping the pseudonyms consistent between
them:
.RS 4
.EX
redactor \-d \-m .redactor.map README.md src/*.py    # look first
redactor \-i \-m .redactor.map README.md src/*.py    # then do it
.EE
.RE
.PP
Block a commit that still contains real data:
.RS 4
.EX
redactor \-c $(git diff \-\-cached \-\-name\-only) || exit 1
.EE
.RE
.PP
Ask what was missed:
.RS 4
.EX
redactor \-p webserver \-A access.log
.EE
.RE
.PP
Find out which machine \fBhost1\fR was:
.RS 4
.EX
redactor \-u \-m .redactor.map answer.txt
.EE
.RE
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR sed (1),
.BR gitignore (5)
.PP
Full documentation:
.UR https://github.com/rtulke/redactor
.UE
.
.SH AUTHOR
Robert Tulke <rt@debian.sh>
.
.SH REPORTING BUGS
A detector that misses something is a security bug, not a feature request:
.UR https://github.com/rtulke/redactor/issues
.UE
